# ai-case-study

## Overview and Origin

### Name of company

OpenAI

### When was the company incorporated?

OpenAI has an unusual structure, which they 
[disclose on their website](https://openai.com/about). OpenAI was founded as a 
non-profit in 2015. In 2019, OpenAI created a subsidiary, OpenAI LP, which is 
controlled by the parent company OpenAI Inc. OpenAI LP is a capped profit 
company, meaning that investors can only make 100 times their investment.

### Who are the founders of the company?

OpenAI lists their founders on their 
[website](https://openai.com/blog/introducing-openai):
- Ilya Sutskever
- Greg Brockman
- Trevor Blackwell
- Vicki Cheung
- Andrej Karpathy
- Durk Kingma
- John Schulman
- Pamela Vagata
- Wojciech Zaremba

The initial board members were:
- Sam Altman 
- Elon Musk

### How did the idea for the company (or project) come about?

OpenAI was founded explicitly for the purpose of creating AGI that would benefit
humanity. They are forthcoming about this and state it on their 
[website](https://openai.com/our-structure):
> We founded the OpenAI Nonprofit in late 2015 with the goal of building safe and beneficial artificial general intelligence for the benefit of humanity. 

[According to Elon Musk](https://youtu.be/0AXpNckFROc?t=263), it was originally 
intended that OpenAI would open source their work.
> The *open* in OpenAI is supposed to mean open source...

In this quote from the Lex Fridman podcast, Musk is criticizing OpenAI, saying 
that they have strayed from their inital founding goals.

### How is the company funded? How much funding have they received?

OpenAI was funded as a non-profit with donations and had received approximately 
$130.5 million prior to it's capped profit model in 2019. The capped profit has
recieved much of its funding in Microsoft, with a multi-year investment of $10 
billion. It's speculated some of this will be paid in cloud computing, possibly
only receiving a small amount as cash, but the details aren't public.

## Business Activities

### What specific problem is the company or project trying to solve?

OpenAI is trying to create AGI that is beneficial to humanity. However, much of
their recent efforts have been focused on generative AI, a relatively new field.

### Who is the company's intended customer? Is there any information about the market size of this set of customers?

Generative AI has a wide range of applications useful to everyone. This is 
evidenced by ChatGPT, which is the fastest-growing consumer application in 
history, since its launch in November 2022. However OpenAI has received most of 
its funding from Microsoft, which is partnered with OpenAI and uses GPT-4 in 
Bing search.

### What solution does this company offer that their competitors do not or cannot offer? (What is the unfair advantage they utilize?)

Generative AI is a new field and there are not many competitors yet. OpenAI's
advantage is in its expert employees, the company was founded by top experts and
the company's ideals help to attract employees.

### Which technologies are they currently using, and how are they implementing them? (This may take a little bit of sleuthing&mdash;you may want to search the companyâ€™s engineering blog or use sites like Stackshare to find this information.)

GPT uses a type of neural net called a transformer - it stands for *Generative
Pre-trained Transformer*.

OpenAI is heavily dependent on cloud computing, and uses Microsoft Azure as 
they are partnered with Microsoft.

OpenAI uses a technique called Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback,
reinforcement learning is when the model trains itself, but human feedback is
added to collaborate on the training process.

## Landscape

### What field is the company in?

DALL-E and GPT are in the field of generative AI. Although OpenAI is currently
creating generative AI products, their mission statement is to create generative
AI. OpenAI could be considered to be in the field of both generative AI and
artificial general intelligence.

### What have been the major trends and innovations of this field over the last 5&ndash;10 years?

A notable research paper *Attention is All You Need* was published in 2017,
providing the details to create a transformer. 

OpenAI released the first GPT model in June 2018.

ChatGPT was released in November 2022, drawing in a massive consumer base.

### What are the other major companies in this field?

Some of their competitors are:
- Google DeepMind
- Anthropic
- Hugging Face
- A121 Labs

## Results

### What has been the business impact of this company so far?

ChatGPT is the fastest-growing consumer application in history and has had a
huge business impact. ChatGPT is estimated to be making $80 million per month,
with a possibility of $1 billion annually. This is a market that didn't
previously exist, and competitors have attempted to share in the success of 
generative AI.

### What are some of the core metrics that companies in this field use to measure success? How is your company performing based on these metrics?

Because OpenAI Inc. is a non-profit, it is difficult to measure their success.
They have not yet achieved the goal of creating AGI beneficial to humanity. They
had to change their corporate structure to secure funding, which suggests 
relying on donations is not viable for their business model.

OpenAI LP can be measured based on its success in the market. OpenAI LP was
recently valued at $86 billion (recent unexpected leadership changes make this 
number less reliable). This is about 660x the amount raised by the non-profit.

### How is your company performing relative to competitors in the same field?

OpenAI has had success in securing investors and revenue, but compared to its 
competitors OpenAI is a smaller company with about 500 employees. OpenAI's 
partnership with Microsoft has helped overcome this, as cloud computing is a
vital part of their business that cloud providers have an advantage in.

## Recommendations

### If you were to advise the company, what products or services would you suggest they offer? (This could be something that a competitor offers, or use your imagination!)

I'd recommend generative AI with audio. OpenAI has had some involvement in this 
area, as ChatGPT has voice output, and Jukebox is a model that creates music, 
released in 2020. I would recommend OpenAI work on Jukebox 2 and custom voices.

### Why do you think that offering this product or service would benefit the company?

Audio would integrate well into OpenAI's existing products. OpenAI gave ChatGPT
the capability to use a natural voice, indicating this is an area they are 
interested in, giving users more customization of the voice is a logical next 
step.

Music generation integrates especially well with DALL-E, potentially giving 
users the ability to create an entire music video just with a text prompt.

OpenAI may have concerns with copyrighted voices, or of deepfaking voices 
without consent, but I believe they should work on this anyway, and release it 
once they have put in constraints and are satisfied with the outcome. Other 
companies that don't have the ethical constraints of a non-profit, such as 
ElevenLabs, are already working on this.

### What technologies would this additional product or service utilize?

This would require minimal new technologies because it's a generative AI similar
to what OpenAI is already doing. It would likely require training data focused 
on music and voices.

### Why are these technologies appropriate for your solution?

It would be appropriate for OpenAI to utilize their existing expertise.

## Sources

https://blogs.bing.com/search/march_2023/Confirmed-the-new-Bing-runs-on-OpenAI%E2%80%99s-GPT-4

https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-11-27/openai-is-still-an-86-billion-nonprofit

https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2023/02/17/is-bigger-better-why-the-chatgpt-vs-gpt-3-vs-gpt-4-battle-is-just-a-family-chat/?sh=55759c95b658

https://fortune.com/2023/08/30/chatgpt-creator-openai-earnings-80-million-a-month-1-billion-annual-revenue-540-million-loss-sam-altman/

https://www.techradar.com/pro/most-of-microsofts-dollar10bn-investment-in-openai-has-gone-on-cloud

https://www.techtarget.com/searchenterpriseai/definition/OpenAI

https://ig.ft.com/generative-ai/

https://www.notta.ai/en/blog/chatgpt-statistics

https://openai.com/about

https://openai.com/blog/introducing-openai

https://openai.com/gpt-4

https://openai.com/our-structure

https://openaimaster.com/openai-competitors/

https://thebusinessdive.com/openai-competitors

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0AXpNckFROc